Elliott was an American post-hardcore band from Louisville, Kentucky. They released three albums and several 7"s in their eight-year existence, and were signed to Revelation Records.
The group was formed in 1995[1] after the demise of lauded Louisville hardcore outfit Falling Forward. FF drummer Ben Lord soon left the band, so new drummer Kevin Ratterman was recruited, joining Chris Higdon (vocals/guitar), Jay Palumbo (guitar) and Jonathan Mobley (bass). Ratterman (who was also a producer and an engineer) would go on to play a large part in writing and producing Elliott's music.
In 1997, Elliott released their debut 7", In Transit. Their first full-length, US Songs, followed in 1998.
2000's False Cathedrals was a more polished affair than its predecessor, featuring vocal harmonies and more piano than US Songs.  False Cathedrals is Elliott's most popular release. It was met with critical acclaim by a broad cross-section of the underground rock community.[2][3][4] According to Revelation Records, it is amongst the highest selling albums in the label's back-catalogue.
Shortly after the completion of False Cathedrals, Palumbo and Mobley left the group to pursue other musical interests. Jason Skaggs took over on bass, and Falling Forward's Benny Clark was enlisted to play guitar. Clark's ethereal, effects-heavy sound would go on to have a significant impact on Elliott's music.
Elliott's third album, Song in the Air, was released in 2003. It marked another stylistic shift for the group, incorporating more post-rock influences, as well as live string arrangements by the Louisville group Rachel's. Pitchfork Media called Song in the Air "a far more dynamic and internally cohesive record than any of the group's previous efforts.".[5]
Skaggs left the group shortly after the completion of Song in the Air. He was replaced by Billy Bisig.
Shortly after Song in the Air's release, Elliott announced their intention to break up. They completed final tours of Europe and the US, before disbanding in November 2003.
A posthumous release, Photorecording, featured two discs: a CD with live tracks and a collection of demos/b-sides, and a DVD with live footage and a documentary about their final US tour. 
Members of Elliott have been busy since the group's demise. Singer/Guitarist Chris Higdon is now fronting the group Frontier(s) alongside members of Automatic, Mouthpiece, Enkindels, Stay Gold and others. Benny Clark is playing bass in a group named Parlour. Kevin Ratterman operates a recording studio called The Funeral Home[6] in Louisville — he also played bass in Your Black Star (2004–2005) and is currently part of the trio Wax Fang.
Revelation Records repressed  U.S. Songs on grey vinyl for Record Store Day 2011.[7]
Simba Recordings pressed Songs in a Transit Wind, a new compilation of Elliott's out-of-print 7"s, on clear, grey, and black 180-gram vinyl for Record Store Day 2013.[8]
