
Daniel John Tyminski (born June 20, 1967) is an American bluegrass composer, vocalist, and instrumentalist. He is a member of the band Alison Krauss and Union Station and has released two solo albums, Carry Me Across the Mountain (2000), on the Doobie Shea Records label, and Wheels (2008), on the Rounder Records label.[2]
He is known for his updated version of the song "Man of Constant Sorrow," which was featured in the movie O Brother, Where Art Thou? and won the 2001 CMA award for best single as well as a Grammy Award for best Country Collaboration with Vocals (along with Harley Allen and Pat Enright, filling out the vocals for the movie's Soggy Bottom Boys). In total, he has won 14 Grammy Awards[3] for solo and collaborative projects. More recently, he was the vocalist on Avicii's international hit "Hey Brother" from the album True.
While Alison Krauss and Union Station were on hiatus, owing to Alison Krauss' tour with Robert Plant, Tyminski formed his own group, the Dan Tyminski Band. The ensemble featured Tyminski on guitar, Ron Stewart on banjo, Adam Steffey on mandolin, Justin Moses on fiddle and dobro, and Barry Bales on upright bass. An album, entitled Wheels, was released on Rounder Records in June 2008. Tyminski played Martin and Bourgeois guitars and Sim Daley played mandolins. In July 2009 the Martin Guitar Company issued, as part of their Custom Artist Series, a D28 Dreadnought acoustic guitar in recognition of Dan's life devoted to performing bluegrass and old-time music. The guitar, named Martin D-28 Dan Tyminski Custom Edition, was issued with its own distinctive details to appeal to flatpickers.[4] For many years Dan's primary guitar has been a well worn 1946 Martin D-28.
At the Ultra Music Festival 2013, he premiered a new single, "Hey Brother", as part of a country-electronic collaboration with Swedish producer Avicii. The song was a Top 5 hit in more than 15 countries, including Australia, Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, Slovakia, Macedonia and the United Kingdom.
In 2017, Tyminski announced a new solo album, Southern Gothic, which was released via Mercury Records Nashville. The lead single was "Bloodline".[5]
