Dobro is an American brand of resonator guitar, currently owned by the Gibson Guitar Corporation and manufactured by its subsidiary Epiphone. The term “dobro” is also used as a generic trademark for any wood-bodied, single-cone resonator guitar.
The Dobro was originally made by the Dopyera brothers when they formed the Dobro Manufacturing Company. Their design, with a single outward-facing  resonator cone, was introduced to compete with the patented inward-facing Tricone and biscuit designs produced by the National String Instrument Corporation. The Dobro name appeared on other instruments, notably electric lap steel guitars and solid body electric guitars and on other resonator instruments such as Safari resonator mandolins.
The name originated in 1928 when the Dopyera brothers, John and Emil (Ed), formed the Dobro Manufacturing Company. Dobro is both a contraction of "Dopyera brothers" and a word meaning 'good' in their native Slovak. An early company motto was "Dobro means good in any language."[citation needed]
The Dobro was the third resonator guitar design by John Dopyera, the inventor of the resonator guitar, but the second to enter production. Unlike his earlier tricone design, which had three ganged inward-facing resonator cones, the Dobro had a single outward-facing cone, with its concave surface facing up. The Dobro company described this as a bowl shaped resonator.
The Dobro was louder than the tricone and cheaper to produce. In Dopyera's opinion, the cost of manufacture had priced the resonator guitar beyond the reach of many players.  His failure to convince his fellow directors at the National String Instrument Corporation to produce a single-cone version was a motivating factor for leaving.
Since National had applied for a patent on an inward-facing single cone (U.S. Patent 1,808,756), Dopyera developed a design that reversed its direction: Rather than having the guitar’s bridge rest on the apex of the cone as the National design did, it rested on an eight legged cast aluminum spider sitting on the perimeter of the cone (U.S. Patent 1,896,484).
In the following years both Dobro and National built a wide variety of metal- and wood-bodied single-cone guitars, while National also continued with the Tricone for a time. Both companies sourced many components from National director Adolph Rickenbacher, and John Dopyera remained a major shareholder in National. By 1932 the Dopyera brothers had gained control of both National and Dobro, which they merged to form the National-Dobro Company. By 1934, National-Dobro had been purchased and renamed Valco.[1] Valco ceased production of Dobro-branded guitars after World War II; however, the Dopyera brothers continued to manufacture resonator guitars under various other brand names.[2]
In 1964, the Dopyera brothers revived the Dobro brand name. They sold the name to Semie Moseley in 1966. In 1970, the Dopyeras' Original Musical Instrument Company (OMI) yet again reacquired the Dobro name.[2]
The Gibson Guitar Corporation acquired OMI in 1993, along with the Dobro name.[3] The company became Gibson's Original Acoustic Instruments division, and production was moved to Nashville in 2000.[2] Dobros are currently manufactured by Gibson subsidiary Epiphone.[4]
The Dobro was first introduced to country music by Roy Acuff.[citation needed]
The term “dobro” (lower case) is widely used as a form of generic trademark to describe  resonator guitars.
Gibson, however, owns the registered trademark Dobro (upper case), and uses it for its own product line.[5]
The Gibson Dobro product line:
