Eyes Set to Kill is an American post-hardcore/metalcore band from Phoenix, Arizona, United States.[15] The Rodriguez sisters, lead guitarist Alexia (born November 23, 1987) and bassist Anissa (born January 27, 1989),[16] along with vocalist Lindsey Vogt started the band in 2003. Lindsey Vogt departed the band in mid-2007 due to issues with management. Lindsey would go on to form a solo project known as "The Taro Sound", and eventually form the band "The Attraction." After Lindsey's departure, Alexia assumed her position as lead vocalist as well as guitarist. Anissa left in late 2016.[15]
The World Outside received widespread critical acclaim and the group was featured on the cover of USA Today, as one of Alternative Press Magazine's "100 Bands You Need To Know", and hosted an episode of MTV's Headbangers Ball.[17] Broken Frames was ranked fifth on the list of "Locals Only: The Best Albums and EPs in 2010".[18]
The band's name was derived from a line out of a poem Alexia wrote in secondary school. Eyes Set to Kill began in 2003 as a three-piece band from Tempe, Arizona. Alexia Rodriguez (lead guitar, backing vocals), Anissa Rodriguez (bass), and Lindsey Vogt (lead vocals), searched the local area for musicians to join their band. Despite sharing the stage with several signed and unsigned artists, including Chiodos, Blessthefall, Goodbye Tomorrow, My American Heart, and Greeley Estates, the initial combination they found was only temporary, and over the next several months, the band continued to undergo changes in their musical lineup. In early 2006, three men joined the line-up of Eyes Set to Kill, those men being Alex Torres (rhythm guitar), Corey Pattakos (backing vocals), and Caleb Clifton (drums). The band worked for Eyes Set to Kill to be active after losing half of their members, and went on to record an EP in 2006 with Arizona's Larry Elyea and his studio, Minds Eye Digital.
Eyes Set to Kill's original EP featuring guitarist Alex Torres and original vocalist, Lindsey Vogt.  The album featured ten songs (six of which were re-recorded for the full-length album, Reach), the EP sold 11,000 units, and was recorded locally at Mind's Eye Digital Recording Studios in Glendale, AZ with Larry Elyea and Keaton.
They toured on the Zippo Hot Tour opening for Papa Roach and Co-Headliners Hed PE
Eyes Set to Kill's debut full-length album, Reach, was released February 19, 2008. The first single from the album was "Reach", with their following single as "Darling".
Reach hit No. 29 on the Billboard Heatseekers chart and No. 77 on Billboard's Independent Music charts in 2008 selling 1900 copies in its first week.[19]
Eyes Set to Kill's second album, The World Outside, was released June 2, 2009. Alexia stated that this new album is "a lot darker."[20]
On April 23, 2009, they posted the song "Heights" on their Myspace page. Craig Mabbitt was a guest vocalist on the song "Deadly Weapons".
The World Outside sold 2,400 copies in the United States in its first week of release, according to Nielsen SoundScan.[21] The World Outside peaked at No. 9 on the Billboard Heatseekers chart[22] and No. 26 on the Independent Albums chart[23]
On July 7, 2009, it was announced that lead singer Alexia Rodriguez will be recording an acoustic EP after being inspired to do so following performing the song "Come Home." Recording began on July 8, 2009. Also, the acoustic EP was stated to be Limited Edition and only available at their shows.[citation needed]
On March 25, 2010 at the Icon in Pocatello, Idaho they announced that they had finished recording their third album, but did not announce a release date. However, on March 26, 2010, at Kilby Court in Salt Lake City, Utah, they announced that the new album would be released in June 2010.
Their third studio album, called Broken Frames, was released on June 8, 2010. The first single from the album is called "All You Ever Knew", and was released on April 1, 2010 on revolvermag.com and on their MySpace page. Brandon Anderson had resigned from the band, and "quit for a girl, but it wasn't just that. He really damaged his vocal chords and he can't scream anymore," band member Caleb says. Frontwoman Alexia said of the album, "I have a lot of memories that I want to forget about. So I wanted to base the theme of the song on that feeling. I have had a friend pass away; I have broken hearts; I have lost faith at times; and I have made mistakes that I can’t even count anymore. So all of the memories of these things inspired me to write about them on this album. We really wanted this first song to be the heaviest and the most evolved sounding track compared to the tracks on The World Outside. 'Broken Frames' is the first song we finished for this record and the first song we tried out this theme on. So I guess you could call this a concept album about everything I want to forget."[24] The song "Ryan" is about Alexia's guitar teacher, who taught her almost everything she knows. She says "he was always a happy person, but not in the inside I guess." One day she went in for lessons, he wasn't there and she later found out he had shot himself in the chest. So she really just wanted to write a song about him. Anissa wrote the piano part in the song.
It was stated on Eyes Set To Kill's Twitter that they will be playing 3 brand new songs at The Chain Reaction in Anaheim, CA March 20, 2011. They played with Rosalynn, Black Veil Brides, Confide, and From First to Last. One of the new songs that debuted is called "Where I Want To Be."
On March 2, 2011 it was announced that Eyes Set To Kill would be playing the Vans Warped Tour 2011.
On October 12, 2010, Alexia "Lexia" Rodriguez released her debut solo album called "Underground Sounds." The album includes a few of ESTK's songs such as "Come Home," with the debut single's acoustic version of "Reach" and a cover of Radiohead's "Climbing Up the Walls."[25] On October 26, 2010, "Let Me In" was released as Lexia's first single with a video under her first solo album "Lexia: Underground Sounds."[26] The song is featured as a bonus track from their third studio album, Broken Frames.
On January 27, 2011, in a blogspot written by Alexia Rodriguez, she reveals the departure of Greg Kerwin.[27] Replacing Greg on guitar for their Alaska tour is David Molina. In 2011, Alexia Rodriguez was featured in the song "Cross-Eyed Catastrophe" on The Black Crown by Suicide Silence.
The band will be on the Horror Nights Tour with Aiden, Get Scared, Vampires Everywhere!, and Dr. Acula from May 13-June 23.
Eyes Set to Kill entered the studio in Ocala, FL with producer Andrew Wade to record a new album on April 27. It was stated on May 11 that the new LP was complete.
The first song to be released is called "The Secrets Between" and will be on the 2011 Warped Tour Compilation CD out June 7. It was announced that a song would be streaming on www.revolvermag.com on June 7 and available as a free track on June 10.
It was announced on May 30 that the LP would be titled "White Lotus."
On June 7, Eyes Set to Kill announced they started their own record label, Foresee Records,[13] and would no longer be with Breaksilence Records. They released White Lotus through a joint venture between their own label Foresee Records and Maphia Entertainment on August 9.[28]
The band embarked on a fall tour with Falling in Reverse and For All Those Sleeping throughout September and October 2011.[29] They enlisted the help of Justin Whitesel (previously from LoveHateHero) for guitar duties for this tour, but he never returned for another tour due to conflicts with former vocalist Cisko Miranda.
In June 2012, It was announced that Eyes Set to Kill would be headlining the Show Your True Colors 2012 North American Tour with My Ticket Home and Awaken the Empire.
On July 19, 2012 it was announced that Eyes Set To Kill had signed to Century Media Records.[5] The band will enter the studio early next year with producer Steve Evetts (Suicide Silence and The Dillinger Escape Plan) to record its next album and debut for Century Media Records. The album is set to be released in spring 2013.[30][31]
On December 20, 2012, the band reached 1,000,000 likes on Facebook prompting them to release a free download of a new demo for their upcoming album entitled[32] "Masks" the following day. To promote their upcoming album the band released a video for the song "Infected" on September 5, 2013.  Masks was released September 17, 2013. In an interview with Loudwire, Alexia Rodriguez describes the meaning behind the album:
"When we first started writing for it, it was after a point where we were always being told what people expected of us. We were unsigned so a lot of people were telling us, “This is what we want you guys to do in order for us to sign you or have anything to do with you.” It was like we were hiding ourselves because we wanted to be accepted because we were unsigned. In a way it felt like we were wearing masks and when we wrote this album, it felt freeing. We weren't pretending to be somebody everyone else wanted us to be."[33]
On July 10, Eyes Set to Kill announced that they were forced to cancel an Oklahoma City show with (hed) p.e. due to Anissa's health issue regarding a blood clot in her eye. Four days later, the band's management revealed that Anissa was showing improvement, but was "not out of the woods yet." Frontwoman Alexia Rodriguez released a statement:
"Eyes Set To Kill must unfortunately cancel the rest of our tour dates in July due to the recent discovery of a blood clot behind my sister Anissa's eye. I have witnessed my sister go through some painful procedures and I am thankful that I have had the chance to be by her side through it all. The doctor said she is going to need a couple weeks to recover and I will continue to stay by her side to help her back to health. We want to thank all the fans for their love and understanding. We also hope to make up for our cancelled appearances somehow, someway. This past week has been a scary journey but I am just happy I could be here for her through the most excruciating experience and we are both so thankful to have been reading all of the love from our devoted fans and family. I truly believe their prayers helped her spirits and sped up her healing process"[34]
In September of 2015, Eyes Set to Kill announced that they were support for New Years Day's "Other Side Tour" a headlining North American Tour featuring Get Scared, The Relapse Symphony and Darksiderz.[35] During this tour Eyes Set to Kill began playing a new song titled "Break" off their forthcoming album.
In March 2016 the band announced a co-headliner tour named "The Visions Tour" with Texas-based band One-Eyed Doll and Open Your Eyes as support. To promote the tour, Eyes Set to Kill and One-Eyed Doll recorded a cover of Depeche Mode's "Enjoy the Silence."[36] 
Shortly after wrapping up the tour, Anissa Rodriguez departed from the band in early in May 2016. For the majority of 2016 the band remained silent on social media causing fans to question the state of the band. 
The band released their first single, "Break", for their sixth album on March 24, 2017 via Spotify. They also announced a headlining tour, "Break Into Action Tour" with The Nearly Deads and Bad Seed Rising. Tiaday Ball from the band, The World Over, replaced Anissa Rodriguez on bass. Aj Bartholomew was announced as an official member of the band. On November 27, 2017 the band released a music video for "Break." Eyes Set to Kill were main support for Dayshell's "New Years Resolution Tour" in December 2017 and concluded in Riverside California on December 15, 2017.
On February 1, 2018, the band went on to release their next single, "Not Sorry". On February 16, 2018, the band released their self-titled album via Century Media Records.[37] Metal band Butcher Babies announced the "Lilith World Tour" and Eyes Set to Kill were the supporting act for the European dates. The band performed a cover of "Zombie" by the Cranberries during this tour.[38] In Summer of 2018 Eyes Set to Kill announced, "The Letting Go Tour" with Dayshell as main support.
To celebrate the 10 year anniversary of their debut album Reach, the band offered VIP packages for fans and releasing the record on vinyl. On the tenth anniversary show of their first album, Eyes Set To Kill invited Brandon Anderson and Lindsey Vogt to perform alongside in December 2018.[39] It is Brandon Anderson's first performance with the band since his departure in 2010. 
[40]
On February 27, 2019 the band released a music video for their cover of Charlie Puth's "Attention. The video ends with former member Brandon Anderson making an appearance.[41]


