
Metro Station was an American pop rock band that was formed in Los Angeles by singer Mason Musso and bassist/guitarist Trace Cyrus. In late 2006, the band signed a recording contract with Columbia Records and RED Ink Records.[6] The band is best known for the top 10 Billboard hit single "Shake It"[7] from the group's self-titled debut album. In 2010, tension between Cyrus and Musso caused the band to go on hiatus. In 2011, the band returned, however, it was announced that Cyrus was no longer a part of the group and Musso had purchased the rights to the name. An EP entitled Middle of the Night was released in 2013, which was led by the single "Every Time I Touch You". In 2014, Cyrus and a new drummer, Spencer Steffan, came to the band, and a new single entitled "Love & War" was released. In 2015, the band released a second full-length album titled Savior. After this, the band went on a U.S and European tour, announcing an EP called Bury Me My Love along with a U.S. 10-year anniversary tour. Just before the tour started, the band announced it would be their final tour and stated they were breaking up.
The band was often described as a scene pop band due to the members' sense of fashion and the band's unique blend of various pop styles.
In 2006, Mason Musso and Trace Cyrus agreed to meet on the set of Hannah Montana, which starred Mason's brother, Mitchel, and Trace's sister, Miley. Sharing musical interests, they decided to form a band.[6] Shortly thereafter, Cyrus recruited Blake Healy from Synthetic Joy as a keyboardist, synthesist, and bassist. Cyrus remained the singer and the lead guitarist. Musso became the group's main singer and rhythm guitarist.
Metro Station soon gained the attention of drummer Anthony Improgo, who was added as the band's drummer after the group released the song "Seventeen Forever" on its Myspace Music website. Musso sang lead on the track, The group's popularity on MySpace Music grew, and the band eventually topped the MySpace Music Unsigned Band's charts.[citation needed]
Metro Station was discovered by an intern working for Columbia Records' Walking Eye program, while looking through the MySpace Music charts, and the group was signed shortly thereafter.[8]
In the July 2007 issue of music magazine Alternative Press, Metro Station was listed as one of the "22 Best Underground Bands (That Likely Won't Stay Underground for Long)."[9]
The band released its self-titled debut studio album in September 2007. The album had two singles released, "Kelsey" and "Control". Although both singles failed to make the charts, with higher sales of the album both became more popular. It wasn't until mid-2008, after the release of the single "Shake It", that the band received a significant amount of commercial exposure, and the song peaked in the top-ten of three US charts. The song peaked at No. 3 on Hot Digital Songs, No. 9 in the Pop 100, No. 10 in the Billboard Hot 100 and peaked at No. 20 in the Hot Dance Airplay chart.[7] The success of the song also affected album sales, the album charting nine months later in 2008 at No. 39 in the Billboard 200, No. 1 Top Electronic Albums and No. 2 in the Top Heatseekers.[10]
In 2009 Metro Station toured in the Believers Never Die Tour Part Deux which with Hey Monday, All Time Low, Cobra Starship and Fall Out Boy.
The band also contributed a song to the Alice in Wonderland soundtrack, Almost Alice, titled "Where's My Angel".
In March 2010, after a number of personal disputes between band members Mason Musso and Trace Cyrus in the studio, Metro Station went into indefinite hiatus as Musso and Cyrus split to pursue solo projects, putting Metro Station on a back-burner until they felt they could record together again.[11] Musso retained his connections to the Metro Station name, while Cyrus began a solo project he named Ashland High.
On May 31, 2011, Musso released a new song, "Ain't So High", on his YouTube page, metrostation2011. Musso regained rights to the Metro Station name and used the band's name without Cyrus. On July 20, Musso announced on Twitter that he was working on the new Metro Station record with help from Anthony Improgo and Blake Healy. On September 25, Musso released a new song "Closer and Closer", produced by Blake Healy. On November 20, Mason Musso, Anthony Improgo, and Ryan Daly performed at the American Music Awards Red Carpet. In May 2013, Musso released the five-track EP "Middle of the Night" through an Indiegogo campaign.
On August 13, 2014, Cyrus returned to the band, four years after previously leaving.[12] Shortly after Cyrus' return, the band released a new single titled "Love & War"[13] and announced the band's inclusion on The Outsiders Tour, which consisted of The Ready Set, The Downtown Fiction, and Against The Current.[14] On October 28, 2014, the band released the music video for a single "She Likes Girls".[15] On October 14, 2014, the group released an EP titled Gold.[16]
The band performed on every date of the 2015 Warped Tour.[17][18] On June 30, 2015, the band released a new album, Savior. The album features 18 tracks, including the single "Getting Over You" featuring Ronnie Radke.[19][20] The group toured with Falling in Reverse, Atilla, and Assuming We Survive from October 2015 to December 2015.[21] Metro Station toured with Never Shout Never, Jule Vera, and Waterparks from January 2016 to February 2016.[22]
Metro Station has announced that the band is in the process of recording an acoustic album.[23][24][25]
On September 2, 2016, the band announced that they are set to tour again in October and November alongside Palaye Royale. In 2017, the band announced they were breaking up.
Final lineup
Past members

Former touring members


