The Fold is an American indie rock band from Chicago, Illinois, United States. They have released 4 full-length albums and 67 EP's since 2006. The latest full-length, Moving Past, came out on October 15, 2013. Career highlights include reaching 20 million views on their YouTube channel, Secrets Keep You Sick was nominated for a Grammy in the category of “Best Recording Package”. Their single "Gravity" from the album This Too Shall Pass reached No. 1 on the CHR Rock charts. The band has more recently written lots of themed music for sports and television. Most notably, the theme songs Ninjago: Masters of Spinjitzu, Chicago Cubs, and several NFL teams.[1]
Their debut album This Too Shall Pass was released February 22, 2006 on Tooth & Nail Records. The follow-up Secrets Keep You Sick was released May 22, 2007. Secrets Keep You Sick was nominated for a Grammy under the "Best Recording Package" category, but the band lost to Cassadaga by Bright Eyes.[2] Directly following the release of Secrets, the band spent their summer on the Vans Warped Tour. The Fold played alongside friends Plain White T's and The Spill Canvas on their own dollar to support their 2008 sold-out UK tour. Upon returning to the U.S., The Fold parted ways with Tooth & Nail, and completed their third studio album Dear Future, Come Get Me with Zack and Kenneth (Cartel, All Time Low, Mayday Parade), who also recorded Secrets Keep You Sick.
In December 2009, the band released a self shot music video for Every Band In The USA, a parody of the Miley Cyrus hit Party in the U.S.A.. The video has been viewed on YouTube nearly 500,000 times.[3] On June 29, 2010 the band released a video for the song Neverender off of Dear Future, Come Get Me. The video was filmed at Willowbrook High School, the former high school of frontman Dan Castady and also of Tom Higgenson, the lead singer of the Grammy-nominated band, Plain White T's.
In November 2010, The Fold released the song "This Christmas" on iTunes, along with two unofficial, self made videos. One of which featured all of the best crowd reactions from Oprah's Ultimate Favorite Things, 2010. The video can be seen here on their YouTube channel.
In January 2011, the band recorded a song titled "The Weekend Whip", the theme song for Lego Ninjago: Masters of Spinjitzu.[4] The band announced in early 2012 that they will be releasing a full EP of ninja-themed pop rock songs aimed at the Ninjago demographic; rolling it out a single at a time via digital outlets, and then completing the process in late Summer 2012 with a full EP release, along with karaoke sing-a-long versions, and various other exclusive content entitled "For The Spinners".
In 2012, The Fold wrote and released "Let's Go Cubbies" which was adopted as the official song of the Chicago Cubs. It continues to be played during every Chicago Cubs broadcast on WGN Radio 720AM. The Fold performed live at Wrigley Field on opening day April 5, 2012.
The Fold's fourth full-length album, Moving Past, was co-produced by the band and Sean O'Keefe, and mixed by J.R. McNeely. The album came out October 15, 2013.[5]
In 2016, The Fold was tasked with writing more music for Chicago Cubs, including a song called "Let The Games Begin", which they played at Opening Day at Wrigley, and again at the final Rally before the post-season. The Cubs went all the way and won The World Series that year, first time in 108 years.
The Fold continue to write and record music in 2017, mostly for LEGO Ninjago, but there has been talk of late about a new full-length album.[6]
In the season 9 finale of Ninjago: Masters of Spinjitzu, The Fold appear as LEGO Minifigures to congratulate the Ninja for defeating Lord Garmadon. Appearing as characters from the show, they sing The Weekend Whip.
The Fold has played over 500 shows since 2005 and toured non-stop in 2009.
SXSW 2010
Warped Tour 2011
Wrigley Field 2012
