Byron Berline (born July 6, 1944) is an American fiddle player. He is widely recognized as one of the world's premier fiddle players[citation needed], known for his ability to play almost any style within the American tradition: old-time, ragtime, bluegrass, Cajun, country, rock, and beyond.
Berline was born in Caldwell, Kansas, started playing the fiddle at age five and quickly developed a talent for it. In 1965, he recorded the album Pickin' and Fiddlin' with the Dillards. The same year, he met Bill Monroe at the Newport Folk Festival and was offered a job with the Bluegrass Boys, but he turned it down in order to finish his education. He graduated from the University of Oklahoma in 1967 with a teaching degree in Physical Education and joined the Bluegrass Boys shortly after, replacing Richard Greene in March, but leaving in September to go into the Army. He recorded three instrumentals with the Blue Grass Boys, including "Gold Rush," which he co-wrote with Monroe, and which has become a jam session standard.
Berline was he was drafted into the U.S. Army in September 1967 and discharged two years later.  He then joined Dillard & Clark on the album Through the Morning, Through the Night. In 1969, he moved to Southern California. Berline won the National Oldtime Fiddle Contest Championship in 1965[1] in Weiser, Idaho. He went on to win the title twice more, in 1967 and 1970.
While in California, he joined The Flying Burrito Brothers in 1971, recording two albums, Last of the Red Hot Burritos (Live), and Six Days On the Road: Live in Amsterdam. After the Burritos' breakup, Berline briefly worked with Stephen Stills' band Manassas (which also included several other Burritos' alumni), contributing to several songs on their debut album.  He formed the Country Gazette early in 1972, together with Alan Munde, Kenny Wertz, and Roger Bush.
Berline joined forces with guitarist Dan Crary, banjo player John Hickman a and others to form Byron Berline and Sundance. Their self-titled debut album was released on MCA Records in 1976. A young Vince Gill later joined the band on mandolin. The album Live at McCabes was released in 1978.
In 1979, Berline had a small role as a country musician in the film, The Rose.
In 1987, Berline appeared briefly playing a violin in the first-season episode "Where No One Has Gone Before" of Star Trek: The Next Generation.
Berline collaborated with banjo player John Hickman and guitarist Dan Crary to form the band Berline, Crary, and Hickman; with the addition of Steve Spurgin and John Moore, later, that band became known as California. California was named the International Bluegrass Music Association Instrumental Group of the Year in 1992, 1993, and 1994.
In April 1995, Berline moved to Guthrie, Oklahoma to open a fiddle shop called "Double Stop". From the jam sessions on the upper floor, "The Byron Berline Band" was formed.
Two years later, he founded the annual Oklahoma International Bluegrass Festival. The annual event is among the most acclaimed bluegrass festivals in the United States. Throughout the festival's existence, Berline has brought an array of legendary bluegrass musicians to Guthrie, including Earl Scruggs, Ricky Skaggs, John Hartford, and many others.  The festival has featured performances by famous international bluegrass artists including the Czech band Druhá Tráva, the Swiss band the Kruger Brothers, and The Japanese Bluegrass Band.
Berline recorded several solo albums, most notably Fiddle and a Song, which featured guest performances from Earl Scruggs, Bill Monroe, Vince Gill, and Mason Williams. In 1995, the album was nominated for a Grammy Award in the Best Bluegrass Album category, and "Sally Goodin" from the album was nominated in the category Best Country & Western Instrumental Performance.
Berline currently owns and operates the Double Stop Fiddle Shop in Guthrie. Byron along with Thomas Trapp, Richard Sharp, Greg Burgess, and Bill Perry, make up The Byron Berline Band. The band travels around the country and to Europe regularly, but continues to perform two concerts a month in Guthrie, entertaining residents of their hometown.
On February 23, 2019, The Double Stop Fiddle Shop burned to the ground while Mr. Berline was in Mexico. The fire destroyed dozens of irreplaceable instruments, however one of Byron's favorite mandolins was preserved in a safe, while the other instruments in the safe were destroyed. Berline has opened a new fiddle shop and music hall across the street from the original shop. 
In his career, Berline has recorded with many of the best-known musicians of modern times, including The Rolling Stones, Bob Dylan, Elton John, The Byrds, Janis Ian, Earl Scruggs, Dillard & Clark, Willie Nelson, Guthrie Thomas, Bill Monroe, The Flying Burrito Brothers, Doc Watson, John Denver, Gene Clark, Rod Stewart, The Eagles, The Band, Vince Gill, Gram Parsons, Emmylou Harris, Tammy Wynette, Alabama, Don Francisco, Mary Chapin Carpenter, The Dillards, Mason Williams, Stephen Stills, Bill Wyman, Manhattan Transfer, Joe Diffie, The Doobie Brothers, Lucinda Williams, Francois Vola, Mickey Gilley, Deke Leonard and Andy Statman. 
His music has also appeared in many television and film soundtracks, including Star Trek, Blue Collar, Basic Instinct, Blaze, Back to the Future Part III, Northern Exposure, Stay Hungry, and Run, Simon, Run.
