Kiros was a Canadian Christian rock band formed in 2002 in Calgary.
The band's name, Kiros, comes from the Greek word meaning "a moment of divine time". Kiros has played in such gigs as the Spring Break 08 Tour (with The Audition, Hit the Lights, Every Avenue and The Morning Light), the Class of 08 Tour (with There for Tomorrow and VersaEmerge), the Canadian Bacon Eh Tour with School Boy Humor, Broadway, and the Back to School 08 tour with Showbread, Oceana, and Before We Forget, the Drive Thru Canadian Invasion Tour and the 2003, 2004, 2005 Warped Tour, Thee Summer Bailout Tour 09 (with Emery, Maylene And The Sons Of Disaster, Ivoryline, Secret and Whisper, and Closure In Moscow), The Terminatour 09 (with Blessed By A Broken Heart, Agraceful, Vanna, Love Hate Hero, Karate High School and In Fear and Faith), the 2010 Inside Out Tour (with Seventh Day Slumber and December Radio), and the 2010 Are You Listening Tour (with Emery, Queens Club and Sent by Ravens).
They have played alongside such bands as Emery (band), Allister, The All-American Rejects, Seventh Day Slumber, Pillar, Fireflight, Thousand Foot Krutch, Lovedrug, Straylight Run and Relient K. They were briefly signed to Torque/Victory Records in 2007 and released one album titled A Single Strand, but have since parted from the label and re-released A Single Strand independently.
Kiros has been featured on many festivals such as Soulfest, The Bamboozle, Cornerstone, TOMfest, Lifest, Rocfest, Pro Life, Rock and Rail, and Creation Festival.  They are managed by Anthony "YOGI" Allgood from Outerloop Management in Washington, D.C., the same company which showcases Christian heavy hitters Emery. In July 2011 Kiros signed with Ain't No Grave Records, a division of Century Media. They finished up their latest full-length album with producer Mark Lee Townsend (Relient K, The Wedding), entitled "Lay Your Weapons Down" which was released in 2012.
In 2013, Kiros embarked on a North America wide farewell tour. The band played their final show on October 25, 2013 at First Baptist Church in Lloydminster, performing songs from all of their albums and were joined by all past and present band members.
