
Cap'n Jazz was an American emo band formed in Chicago in 1989 by brothers Tim and Mike Kinsella, who were joined by Sam Zurick and Victor Villarreal. After a number of name changes and the addition of guitarist Davey von Bohlen, the band began to earn a cult following in the Chicago area and the Midwest.[citation needed]
Cap'n Jazz recorded several singles for independent labels in the early 90s as well as contributing to several compilations.
In 1995, the band released its only full-length album, Burritos, Inspiration Point, Fork Balloon Sports, Cards in the Spokes, Automatic Biographies, Kites, Kung Fu, Trophies, Banana Peels We've Slipped On and Egg Shells We've Tippy Toed Over on the Man with Gun label. The album is sometimes referred to as Shmap'n Shmazz, which was printed on top of the CD.[3]
The band broke up in July 1995, shortly after Shmap'n Shmazz's release, on the night of a show at Little Rock's Das Yutes a Go-Go. In 1998, Jade Tree assembled a double-disc Cap'n Jazz retrospective titled Analphabetapolothology which compiles the band's complete recorded works (save for Naive, their song on Achtung Chicago! Zwei): Shmap'n Shmazz, early singles, material from split releases, compilation tracks, unreleased demos and outtakes and several tracks from their farewell performance in Chicago.
The band's lineup was Tim Kinsella (vocals); Samuel Zurick (bass guitar); Mike Kinsella (drums, vocals); Victor Villarreal (guitar, vocals); and Davey von Bohlen (guitar, vocals from 1994–95).[4]
Cap'n Jazz reunited at The Empty Bottle on Friday, January 22, 2010, as part of Joan of Arc's Don't Mind Control Variety Show.
After playing that short, impromptu set in Chicago, the band played its first official reunited show at the annual Forecastle Festival in Louisville on July 10, 2010,[5] and a hometown reunion show a week later at the Bottom Lounge, supporting the vinyl re-release of Analphabetapolothology on Jade Tree Records, where they gained success.[6][7] Due to the show selling out in about 48 hours, a second show was added the next night. Later, it was announced that they would also be playing reunion shows across the United States [8] during the summer and fall of 2010.
Most recently, Cap'n Jazz was included in the lineup for the 2017 FYF Fest in Los Angeles' Exposition Park.[9] This marks the band's first show since 2010. The FYF appearance was followed by shows in San Francisco, Chicago, New York and London, including an appearance at Riot Fest 2017 in Chicago.
Cap'n Jazz have influenced a number of bands. Former members of the band continue to play music, most notably in Make Believe, The Promise Ring, American Football, Owls, Ghosts and Vodka, Joan of Arc and Owen.[citation needed]
