Cute Is What We Aim For is an American rock band from Buffalo, New York. The band formed in 2005, and have since released two albums: The Same Old Blood Rush with a New Touch and Rotation. The band was previously signed with record label Fueled by Ramen for their two releases, but are currently unsigned.
The original members of Cute Is What We Aim For were childhood friends.[3] When  the band was formed in January 2005,[4] the members were still in their teenage years.[3] Since the band's inception, it has been subject to several line-up changes.[5] Shortly after forming in January 2005, Cute Is What We Aim For began releasing demos through Myspace and PureVolume, which helped the band gain initial exposure.[4] Guitarist Jeff Czum said their success was brought about by Hawthorne Heights' street team: "Literally overnight we got like 10,000 fans on Myspace and started to get attention from labels."[6] In the following months, the group continued to record and play shows, increasing their fan base and declining advances from record labels.[4] On November 29, it was announced that the band had signed to Fueled by Ramen[7] after their founder John Janick listened to their New York City recording sessions in July.[8]
On June 20, 2006, Cute Is What We Aim For's debut album, The Same Old Blood Rush with a New Touch hit store shelves, debuting at number 75 on the Billboard 200.
During the fall of 2007, Cimato parted ways with the band. Jack Marin (formerly of October Fall) filled the role of touring bassist until Cimato returned to the band. In October 2007, Cimato was asked in an interview if he viewed his role in the band as permanent. He replied, "Definitely permanent. I had 6 months at home to finish up high school and after that I was like, 'Wow, I miss playing music.' I was blessed enough to get that opportunity again." However, Cimato left the band once again in March 2008. It was announced that Dave Melillo would play bass until further notice.
In 2008, Cute Is What We Aim For entered the studio to record with producer John Feldmann. Rotation debuted at #21 on the U.S. Billboard 200 albums chart selling around 22,000 copies.
In 2010, it was announced that the band Cute Is What We Aim For lost all of its members except for frontman Shaant Hacikyan, who stated that he planned to continue releasing music under the band's name.[9] Dave Melillo and Jeff Czum went on to form Nocturnal Me. The band appeared on the Punk Goes Pop 3 compilation, released on November 2, 2010, covering the song "Dead and Gone" by T.I. and Justin Timberlake. Their new band released two EPs before signing to Apparition Records in 2011.
On April 29, 2010, Hacikyan released a new single called "Harbor" which was made available to download online.
On August 18, 2012, the band played an hour-long acoustic set  with original members Shaant Hacikyan, Fred Cimato, and Jeff Czum. This was the first set the full band had performed in 6 years. During the set, the band announced that they were officially making a comeback.  Cute Is What We Aim For played a comeback show with The Daydream Chronicles and Fictitious Ray on September 21, 2012 at Mohawk Place in Buffalo, New York. On January 20, 2013, Shaant Hacikyan announced at a show in Memphis, TN that the band would be releasing new material Spring/Summer 2013, with demos to come earlier than that. It is currently unclear if the release will be an EP or an LP. On 27 February 2013, Cute Is What We Aim For premiered a new demo called "Titanic". 20 days later on 27 March they posted a YouTube link to a lyric video of their new song named "Next to Me". On September 2, the band released another new song titled "A Closed Mind With an Open Mouth". The song was made available for purchase on the iTunes store the next day. A headlining tour was also announced to coincide with the newly released song. The band supported You Me at Six on their US tour in September and October.[10]
On January 18, 2014 the band shared some songs such as "I Was Worth Using" on Soundcloud. The band performed on the Vans Warped Tour in 2014, after which they broke up for a second time. In January 2016, Hacikyan reconnected with the rest of the band members. The group started discussing the possibility of a 10-year tour for The Same Old Blood Rush with a New Touch.[11] In March, the band announced the anniversary tour, via their official Instagram page. On 23 November 2016,[12] the band were announced to perform at the Slam Dunk Festival in the UK, where they will continue their 10-year anniversary tour.
Current members
Former members
