
House of Heroes are an alternative rock band from Columbus, Ohio. They have released six albums: What You Want Is Now (2003), House of Heroes (2005), The End Is Not the End (2008), Suburba (2010), Cold Hard Want (2012), and Colors (2016). The band also released the album Ten Months (2001) under their original name, No Tagbacks, which had more of a punk sound than their releases as House of Heroes. They also re-released their self-titled record under the name of Say No More (2006). The band was last composed of Tim Skipper, Colin Rigsby, A.J. Babcock, and Eric Newcomer. 
The band got started in 1996 at Hilliard Davidson High School (Hilliard, Ohio), originally as a punk band called Plan B, with Tim Skipper, A.J. Babcock, and Nate Rothacker on drums. In 1998, Colin Rigsby replaced Nate Rothacker on drums and they changed their name to No Tagbacks, then later to House of Heroes (changing their punk style in the process). The band recorded early demos at Chris Lundquist's home studio LundquistAudio (formerly Lunkhead Studio). In 2003 they released their first album What You Want Is Now under the name House of Heroes.[1]
Jared Rigsby replaced A.J. Babcock as the band's live bassist in December 2005, as Babcock had married and focused on a side project with his wife called "FlowerDagger". Babcock eventually rejoined the band as the live bassist and Jared Rigsby became an official member as the band's second guitarist. In 2009, Babcock stopped touring for the second time and was replaced by Eric Newcomer as the live bassist. After Babcock rejoined the band once more in 2012 as bassist, Newcomer became an official member as the band's second guitarist, involved in the writing and recording of Cold Hard Want. After only a brief touring stint in early 2012, Babcock stopped touring again and the band recruited Matt Lott (formerly of Wavorly) as touring bassist. Jared Rigsby did not appear in the band's "In The Studio" video for Cold Hard Want,[2] nor is he featured in the band's press shot on the official page for Cold Hard Want.[3]
In March 2010 Colin Rigsby was replaced by Josh Dun (of Twenty One Pilots) on drums as Rigsby felt he needed to spend more time with his family. In October 2010 Rigsby resumed drumming duty.[4]
The band went inactive in music and social media in September 2016, leading many to believe that they had broken up. However, in December 2018, they played a ten-year anniversary show for their 2008 album The End Is Not the End.[citation needed] The band were joined onstage by Dun, who played drums during the track "God Save the Foolish Kings".[citation needed]
According to drummer, Colin Rigsby, some of House of Heroes influences are: The Beatles, Queen, Bruce Springsteen, and The Clash. Tim Skipper also said that Muse is a source of influence.[5]
In his free time, Rigsby works on Art, and has his own website.[6] He is currently working with Jon Schneck of Relient K on a graphic novel titled "En Carne."
Though they are sometimes considered to be Christian rock due to their association with Gotee Records, their lyrics are not always transparently Christian. In an interview with Ransom.tv, Tim Skipper discusses their part in Christian music: "We didn't feel drawn to necessarily be in the church and be a praise and worship band, and we didn't feel drawn to just be outside of it. We kind of felt like we should straddle the line, and the big deal was to keep the integrity of the music intact and not to sacrifice any of the artistry." [7]
In another interview, bassist AJ Babcock said, "We never wanted to try to pander to a Christian audience by saying things that necessarily were just kind of, you know, lip service to people. We never want to do that unless it meant something, unless it was in context in a song."[8] In their fifth album, Suburba, they embrace this idea, with songs such as "Salt in the Sea" and "Constant", which both can be seen as songs with Christian ideas.
In the same interview, Skipper summarizes their role in saying "We're Christian people, and we play rock and roll music."[8]
However, in an April 2016 interview with BadChristian, Skipper revealed that the band never set out to be a Christian band, and their current stance is that the interpretation is up to the listeners. He also stated that not everybody in House of Heroes is presently a Christian.[9]
Ten Months is the only album released under the name No Tagbacks. It was released by Four Door Entertainment.[citation needed]
House of Heroes released their debut, What You Want Is Now, in 2003 on Vanishing Point Records, owned by Scott Stilletta formerly of Plankeye. It includes 13 tracks, two of which were later composed differently and released on their self-titled record. It was recorded in Columbus, Ohio. After the release of this album, the band was signed to Gotee Records by its owner and founder, Toby McKeehan. They now release their albums on that label.[citation needed]
Their first album released under Gotee Records was House of Heroes, released on April 26, 2005, includes 11 tracks.[citation needed] During the same year, the group toured with several other bands such as Relient K, Rufio, and MxPx. The band made a music video around this time for their song "Serial Sleepers"[citation needed]
Say No More, was released on May 2, 2006. A re-release of their self-titled debut album, it includes two bonus tracks: "The Invisible Hook" and "You Are the Judas of the Cheerleading Squad".[10]
In 2008, before the release of their next album, the band launched FreeHOH.com, a website where "In the Valley of the Dying Sun", "Sooner or Later", and "By Your Side" were offered as free downloads. The End Is Not the End was subsequently released on September 23, 2008.
The End Is Not the End is really considered the band's breakthrough album, and most epic so far.[citation needed] It charted on the Billboard Christian Albums chart at No. 19 and No. 9 on Heatseekers Albums. "In the Valley of the Dying Sun" was turned into a music video, and was No. 10 on TVU's Most Wanted of 2008.[citation needed] The video was also nominated for a Dove Award in 2009 for Short Form Music Video.[citation needed] "In The Valley of The Dying Sun" was No. 1 on RadioU's 2008's Most Wanted.[citation needed]
The Acoustic End EP was released on April 7, 2009 and includes the songs: "Ghost", "New Moon", and "If (Acoustic)".[citation needed] The title The Acoustic End EP refers to their album title The End Is Not the End.
House of Heroes Meets the Beatles a three-song EP, referring to the Beatles album Meet the Beatles!, was released on June 9, 2009, features "Can't Buy Me Love", "It Won't Be Long" and "Ob-La-Di, Ob-La-Da".[11] The album artwork of this digital EP is set around the Beatles' A Hard Day's Night
On November 10, 2009, House of Heroes digitally released a three-song EP, for Christmas including a cover of "All I Want for Christmas Is You", "Silent Night", and "O come, O come, Emmanuel".[12]
The band entered Dark Horse Recording Studio on February 1, 2010 to record their fourth full-length album.[13] The album is called Suburba, and was released on August 3, 2010 by Gotee Records.[14] Their first single is entitled "Elevator" and is currently playing on RadioU.  They also released their song "God Save The Foolish Kings" on their Website and YouTube page. A second single, entitled "Constant" is currently playing on Air 1. On June 29, 2010, the band began offering the song "Independence Day for a Petty Thief" as a free download for Twitter users who posted a promotional message about the song.
House of Heroes entered Smoakstack Studios on December 12, 2011 in order to record their fifth album, Cold Hard Want.[15] The band went with producer Paul Moak, who has produced artists such as Seabird, Lovedrug, Mat Kearney, after going with producer Mark Lee Townsend for the previous two albums.[citation needed] As of February 22, 2012, the record has been completely recorded and mastered.[16] On their Tumblr page, the band announced that the album would be out in July 2012, and that they would be releasing their first single, "Touch This Light", its music video, and a B-Side called "Dead" on April 24, 2012.[17] The band also put up a teaser page for the album with a 1:41 teaser video which features brand new album art and of one of the album's songs, "Out My Way"[18]
On April 20, 2012, "Touch This Light" began playing on RadioU.[citation needed]
As a contract wrap-up with Gotee Records, House of Heroes released The Knock Down Drag Outs, which is mostly a collection of previously released material. The b-sides include songs from House of Heroes Meet the Beatles and The Acoustic End EP, along with bonus tracks from their prior albums.[19] In addition, the album included three new songs: "Choose Your Blade," "Hide," and "Your Casualty".[20]
In March 2014, House of Heroes teased six song titles from their upcoming EP.[21] Beginning in June, they posted more song teasers on their Facebook and Twitter pages, along with lyrics and promotional photos.[22] On July 18, 2014, the band formally announced the EP, entitled Smoke, with a promotional video of studio footage backed by a clip from a new song, "Infinite". The EP was released August 19, 2014, and is the band's first independent release since 2003's "What You Want Is Now".[23]
On June 1, 2016, they released their sixth album, Colors. It was the band's first concept album, telling a story of three characters.
They toured with tobyMac and Brandon Heath in January and February 2011 on the Winter Wonder Slam tour.[24]
Current
Former
Former touring musicians
Timeline
Independently crowdfunded in 2014
Independently crowdfunded in 2014
An early version of the song "You Are the Judas of the Cheerleading Squad", was also featured on a compilation where 25 bands each had one hour to record and mix a song. The album was called 25 Hour Grand Prix.[citation needed]
The band was known as "No Tagbacks" before they were House of Heroes.
Members
Discography
Music Videos
