Boys Night Out is a Canadian emo/post-hardcore band from Burlington, Ontario, Canada.
The band formed in 2001 when lead vocalist Connor Lovat-Fraser and current guitarist Jeff Davis started collaborating on songs. The work eventually led to the four-song You Are My Canvas demo, an EP influenced by fellow Burlington hardcore act Grade. Following the release of this demo, the band signed to One Day Savior Records and subsequently released the Broken Bones & Bloody Kisses EP.
Interest in the band was immediate, and a short while later they signed to New Jersey-based Ferret Records.[1] Their debut full-length album, 2003's Make Yourself Sick, was a shock to some fans. It was much lighter and pop-punk-oriented, but with the same heavy screaming and guitars found on earlier releases. The band toured heavily in support of the record with acts such as My Chemical Romance, Catch 22, Saves the Day, and a stint on the Warped Tour circuit. Boys Night Out also was featured in the Nintendo Fusion Tour with Fall Out Boy, Motion City Soundtrack, The Starting Line, and Panic! at the Disco.
The band's next effort, 2005's Trainwreck, is a somewhat more subdued, experimental concept album based on a man's loss of sanity. Trainwreck opens with a doctor dictating his notes into a tape recorder. The album chronicles the arrest, trial, treatment and subsequent release of a man who, in a waking dream, murders his wife and then cuts both his hands off with a machine at his work so that he can not kill again. Kara Dupuy's vocals act as the deceased wife's voice heard by the patient throughout the album.
The band released their third album, Boys Night Out, on June 26, 2007. The first single from the album was "Up with Me".
Boys Night Out played their first show in two years at the Opera House in Toronto using the original five members, on 24 October 2009.  The band played both Broken Bones And Bloody Kisses and Make Yourself Sick in their entirety.
Connor posted the following regarding the band's status on the Boys Night Out Facebook group:
"No breakup. No lost members. No getting dropped.
We're just taking it easy for a while. Once we finished our contract with Ferret we opted to leave the label. We've been touring non-stop for the past few years and we're all feeling the wear and tear of constant life on the road. We started this band as a means of escape from everyday life...this is a return to that frame of mind. Easy like Sunday morning. It's pretty refreshing to just sit back and write songs without pressure from all sides telling you that there HAS to be a new record on day x. Before we release another full-length we're going to take our time to make sure that it's as wickedly radical and gnarly as it can possibly be. So, yeah...that's the gist of it. You won't be seeing us playing a whole lot of shows in the coming months - and we definitely won't be playing extended tours - but we're still alive and kickin'."
In 2009, Lovat-Fraser and Davis joined producer Scott Komer to form a band called Hard Calibers.[2] The main purpose of the band was to record a version of ESRT Page 14 by Justin Veatch of the Ivoryton Piano Factory.[3] The song is featured on a compilation album of music by Veatch, who died in 2008 at the age of 17.[4]
Recently Connor has been working with local acts such as the punk band 'The Eff Holes', and Electro-Pop group 'Crazy Diamond' featuring Regan and Matt Davis.
The band's song "I Got Punched in the Nose for Sticking My Face in Other Peoples Business" was used on the last episode of an anime titled Beck: Mongolian Chop Squad.
As of early 2013 the band has still yet to make an official announcement on its split, but lead singer Lovat-fraser had this to say about the band's future, "I'm sorry to say it, but I can't really see BNO getting back together for any shows. It seems that everyone is getting back together for reunion shows these days, but sadly, I don't think BNO will be counted among them."
In March 2013, Boys Night Out's Twitter account posted the following in regards to a new album: "Just finished recording the new full-length. Sounds like shit.".[5] Two days later the band followed up by revealing their previous statement wasn't a reality, but finally provided fans with some closure on the band's end. They tweeted the following: "There is no new album, but if we recorded one right now it would absolutely sound like shit.".[5] The former band's Twitter page description also states they are no longer a band though they still used the account from time to time.[6]
On January 12, 2015, the band's Twitter account changed its heading to "2015. Stuff is a-brewin'." Connor's Twitter also confirms that the band is working on new material.
On October 10, 2015, the band's Official Instagram posted an image of Bassist Dave Costa and Drummer Ben Arseneau in the studio with the caption "Day one with @derekbrightest at @fox_sounds - new album on the way!"
On January 21, 2016, the band released a press release announcing the release of a new album, "Black Dogs", in spring of 2016.[7]
In early 2006, Kara Dupuy left Boys Night Out. As seen on the live show footage of Dude, You Need to Stop Dancing, she had recently become engaged and chose to pursue a new life off the road.
In March, 2006, Andy Lewis, left his former band, The Fullblast, to join Boys Night Out on guitar.
In late 2006, Brian Southall left the band to join The Receiving End of Sirens. He was replaced with Ben Arseneau, the original drummer.
